docs/DEVELOPMENT.md, before:

# Development Guide

This document provides guidelines and commands for developing geoetl.

## Prerequisites

- Rust 1.90.0 or later
- [mise](https://mise.jdx.dev/) for tool version management (optional but recommended)

## Project Structure

```
geoetl/
├── crates/
│   ├── geoetl-cli/     # Command-line interface
│   └── geoetl-core/    # Core library functionality
├── docs/               # Documentation
└── Cargo.toml          # Workspace configuration
```

## Setup

Install dependencies using mise (if available):
```bash
mise install
```

Or manually ensure you have Rust 1.90.0 installed.

## Development Workflow

### Quick Development Cycle

Format, lint, and run the CLI in one command:
```bash
cargo fmt --all && cargo clippy --workspace --all-targets --all-features && cargo run -p geoetl-cli
```

### Code Formatting

Format all code:
```bash
cargo fmt --all
```

Check formatting without making changes:
```bash
cargo fmt --check
```

### Linting

Run Clippy on all targets:
```bash
cargo clippy --all-targets --all-features
```

Treat warnings as errors (CI mode):
```bash
cargo clippy --all-targets --all-features -- -D warnings
```

### Testing

Run all tests:
```bash
cargo test
```

Test specific crate:
```bash
cargo test -p geoetl-core
cargo test -p geoetl-cli
```

Run tests with output:
```bash
cargo test -- --nocapture
```

### Running

Run the CLI:
```bash
cargo run -p geoetl-cli
```

Run with arguments:
```bash
cargo run -p geoetl-cli -- [args]
```

### Building

Build all crates:
```bash
cargo build
```

Build release version:
```bash
cargo build --release
```

Build specific crate:
```bash
cargo build -p geoetl-cli
```

### Checking

Quick compile check without building:
```bash
cargo check
```

## Pre-Commit Checklist

Before committing code, ensure:

1. Code is formatted: `cargo fmt`
2. No Clippy warnings: `cargo clippy --all-targets --all-features -- -D warnings`
3. All tests pass: `cargo test`
4. Documentation builds: `cargo doc --no-deps`

All in one command:
```bash
cargo fmt && cargo clippy --all-targets --all-features -- -D warnings && cargo test
```

## Documentation

Build documentation:
```bash
cargo doc --no-deps --open
```

Build with private items:
```bash
cargo doc --no-deps --document-private-items --open
```

## Troubleshooting

### Clean build artifacts
```bash
cargo clean
```

### Update dependencies
```bash
cargo update
```

### Check for outdated dependencies
```bash
cargo outdated
```

Commit message:

feat(cli): implement initial CLI framework and driver registry
  This commit introduces the initial version of the geoetl-cli, establishing the foundational command structure, a comprehensive driver registry, and logging capabilities.

  Key Changes:

   - CLI Framework:
       - Implemented a clap-based CLI with three primary commands:
           - convert: For converting between vector formats (stubbed).
           - info: For displaying dataset information (stubbed).
           - drivers: For listing available format drivers (functional).
       - Added global flags for verbosity (-v) and debug (-d) logging.

   - Driver Registry (`geoetl-core`):
       - Created a new geoetl-core crate to house the driver registry and core logic.
       - The registry defines 68+ vector format drivers compatible with GDAL, each with info,
         read, and write capabilities.
       - Initial support is marked for GeoJSON and Parquet, with others Planned or NotSupported.
       - The drivers command now displays this information in a formatted table using tabled.

   - Logging:
       - Integrated tracing and tracing-subscriber for structured logging.
       - Log levels are controlled by the --verbose and --debug flags.

   - Documentation:
       - Added a USERGUIDE.md and QUICKREF.md to document the new CLI commands and usage.
       - Updated the README.md and DEVELOPMENT.md to reflect the new CLI structure and
         development status.

  This foundational work paves the way for implementing the core I/O and processing logic in Phase 2. The CLI provides a clear user-facing structure, and the driver registry is central to the system's extensibility.

docs/DEVELOPMENT.md, after:

# Development Guide

This document provides guidelines and commands for developing geoetl.

## Documentation

- [User Guide](USERGUIDE.md) - Complete guide to using GeoETL CLI
- [Vision](VISION.md) - Project vision and roadmap
- [Development Guide](DEVELOPMENT.md) - This document

## Prerequisites

- Rust 1.90.0 or later
- [mise](https://mise.jdx.dev/) for tool version management (optional but recommended)

## Project Structure

```
geoetl/
├── crates/
│   ├── geoetl-cli/     # Command-line interface
│   └── geoetl-core/    # Core library functionality
├── docs/               # Documentation
└── Cargo.toml          # Workspace configuration
```

## Setup

Install dependencies using mise (if available):
```bash
mise install
```

Or manually ensure you have Rust 1.90.0 installed.

## Development Workflow

### Quick Development Cycle

Format, lint, and run the CLI in one command:
```bash
cargo fmt --all && cargo clippy --workspace --all-targets --all-features && cargo run -p geoetl-cli
```

### Code Formatting

Format all code:
```bash
cargo fmt --all
```

Check formatting without making changes:
```bash
cargo fmt --check
```

### Linting

Run Clippy on all targets:
```bash
cargo clippy --all-targets --all-features
```

Treat warnings as errors (CI mode):
```bash
cargo clippy --all-targets --all-features -- -D warnings
```

### Testing

Run all tests:
```bash
cargo test
```

Test specific crate:
```bash
cargo test -p geoetl-core
cargo test -p geoetl-cli
```

Run tests with output:
```bash
cargo test -- --nocapture
```

### Running

Run the CLI:
```bash
cargo run -p geoetl-cli
```

Run with arguments:
```bash
cargo run -p geoetl-cli -- [args]
```

### Building

Build all crates:
```bash
cargo build
```

Build release version:
```bash
cargo build --release
```

Build specific crate:
```bash
cargo build -p geoetl-cli
```

### Checking

Quick compile check without building:
```bash
cargo check
```

## Pre-Commit Checklist

Before committing code, ensure:

1. Code is formatted: `cargo fmt`
2. No Clippy warnings: `cargo clippy --all-targets --all-features -- -D warnings`
3. All tests pass: `cargo test`
4. Documentation builds: `cargo doc --no-deps`

All in one command:
```bash
cargo fmt && cargo clippy --all-targets --all-features -- -D warnings && cargo test
```

## Documentation

Build documentation:
```bash
cargo doc --no-deps --open
```

Build with private items:
```bash
cargo doc --no-deps --document-private-items --open
```

## Troubleshooting

### Clean build artifacts
```bash
cargo clean
```

### Update dependencies
```bash
cargo update
```

### Check for outdated dependencies
```bash
cargo outdated
```
